>>The Electronic University
presents "Cosmic Drama"
with Alan Watts.
>>Well, we're still on the
ferry boat, Vallejo, my home.
And as it happens to be
a rather nice afternoon,
we decided to come out
onto the patio instead
of working in the studio.
I've been talking to
you about the mystery
of the curious
sensation of nothingness
that lies behind ourselves.
First of all, I gave
you the illustration
of the blank space
behind the eyes,
about the silence out of
which all sound comes,
and about empty space out of
which all the stars appear.
And you remember that
in the last talk,
I likened this curious
emptiness behind everything
to God, an imageless,
non-idolatrous God of which we
could have no conception at all.
And I've also pointed
out that basically,
when you really get down to
it, that emptiness is yourself.
Now, it sounds very odd in
our civilization to say,
therefor I am God.
Or for that matter, you are God.
But you will
remember, of course,
that this exactly is
what Jesus Christ felt.
And he was crucified for
it because, in his culture,
God was conceived as the
royal monarch of the universe.
And therefore, anybody who gets
up and says, "Well, I am God,"
is blasphemous.
He's subversive.
He's claiming to be if
not the boss himself,
at least the boss's son.
And that's a put-down
for everybody else.
But Jesus had to say it that
way because, in his culture,
they did not have, as the Hindus
have, the idea that everybody--
not only human beings,
but animals and plants,
all sentient beings whatsoever--
are God in disguise.
Now, let me try to explain
this a little more clearly.
Because I cannot help thinking
of myself identical with,
continuous with, one with the
whole energy that expresses
itself as this universe.
If the universe
is made of stars,
a star is a center from
which energy flows.
In other words,
there's the middle,
and all the rays
come out from it.
And so, I feel that as the
image of the whole thing,
that all energy is a center
from which rays come out.
And therefore, each one
of us is an expression
of what is basically
the whole thing.
Now therefore,
whereas in the West
in the Jewish, Christian,
and Islamic religions,
we have thought of God
not only as a monarch,
but as the maker of the world.
And as a result of that, we look
upon the world as an artifact,
a sort of machine created
by a great engineer.
There's a different
conception in India,
where the world is not seen as
an artifact, but as a drama.
And therefore, God is not
to maker and architect
of the universe,
but the actor of it,
and therefore is playing
all the parts at once.
And this connects
up with the idea
of each one of us as persons,
because a person is a mask,
from the Latin word
persona, the mask worn
by the actors in
Greco-Roman drama.
So this is an entirely different
conception of the world.
And as I think I shall
be able to show you,
it makes an amazing
amount of sense.
So we start from the
premise that you-- and you
don't know who you are.
You can't see yourself.
And as I pointed
out, you don't know
how you grow your body, how you
make your nervous system work,
how you managed to emerge in
this environment of nature.
And so this unknown you,
the you that is not you,
the you that is not
the ego, this is God.
That is to say, not
the cosmic boss,
but the fundamental ground of
being-- the reality that always
was, is, and will be-- that
lies at the basis of reality--
that's you.
Now, let's go into a more
mythological kind of imagery.
Suppose you are God.
Suppose you have all
time, all eternity,
and all power at your disposal.
What would you do?
I believe you would say
to yourself after a while,
man, get lost.
It's like asking
another question, which
is supposing you
were given the power
to dream any dream you
wanted to dream every night.
Naturally, you could
dream any span of time.
You could dream 75 years of time
in one night, 100 years of time
in one night, 1,000 years
of time in one night.
And it could be
anything you wanted.
You make up your mind
before you went to sleep.
Tonight, I'm going to
dream of so and so.
Well, naturally,
you would start out
by fulfilling all your wishes.
You would have all the
pleasures you could imagine,
the most marvelous meals, the
most entrancing love affairs,
the most romantic journeys.
You could listen to music
such as no mortal has heard
and see landscapes beyond
our wildest dreams.
And for several
nights, oh, maybe
for a whole month
of nights, you would
go on that way having
a wonderful time.
But then a while, you'd
begin to think, well,
I have seen quite a bit.
Let's spice it up.
Let's have a little adventure.
And therefore, you
would dream of yourself
being threatened by
all sorts of dangers.
You would rescue
princesses from dragons.
You would perhaps engage
in notable battles.
You would be a hero.
And then, as time
went on, you would
dare yourself to do more
and more outrageous things.
And at some point
in the game, you
would say tonight I am
going to dream in such a way
that I don't know
that I'm dreaming,
so that you would
take the experience
of the dream for
complete reality.
And what a shock
when you woke up.
And you really scare yourself.
And then on
successive nights, you
might dare yourself
to experience the most
extraordinary things just for
the contrast when you woke up.
You could, for
example, dream yourself
in situations of extreme
poverty, disease, agony.
You could, as it were, work
on the vibration of suffering
to its most intense
point, and then suddenly
wake up and find it was after
all nothing but a dream.
And everything's perfectly OK.
And you would say, wow.
Man, that was a gas.
Well, how do you
know that that's not
what you're doing already?
You sitting there with
all your problems,
with all your whole
complicated life situation,
listening to me, it may
just be the very dream
you decided to get into.
If you like it, crazy.
If you don't like it, what fun
it will be when you wake up.
Do you see?
This is the essence of drama.
In drama, all the people
who come there know it's
only a play.
The proscenium arch,
the cinema screen
tells us this is an illusion.
It is not for real.
But the actors are
trying to give us
the sensation that
it is for real.
In other words, they are going
to act their part so convincing
that they are going
to have us sitting
on the edge of our
seats in anxiety.
They're going to make us laugh.
They're going to make us cry.
They're going to
make us feel horror.
Even though we know in
the back of our minds,
even though we
have what in German
is called a hintergedanke,
which is the thought way, way,
way in the back of your mind
that you're hardly aware of,
but you really
know all the time.
In the theatre, we have a
hintergedanke that it's only
a play.
But the mastery of
the actor is that he
is going to try almost to
convince us that it's real.
And so therefore,
imagine a situation
where you have the best of all
possible actors, namely God,
and the best of all possible
audiences ready to be taken in
and convinced that
it's real, namely God.
And that you are all
many, many masks,
which the basic consciousness,
the basic mind of the universe
is assuming.
To use a verse from
G.K. Chesterton,
"and now a great thing in the
street seems any human nod,
where move in strange democracy
the million masks of God."
And of course, here it is.
This is the mask of Vishnu,
the preserver of the universe.
And you see it is
a multiple mask
to illustrate the fact that the
one who looks out of my eyes
and out of all your
eyes is the same center.
So if I look at
another human being,
and I look straight into their
eyes, isn't that curious?
We don't like doing that.
There's something embarrassing
about looking into our eyes
too closely.
As if, don't look
at me that closely,
because I might
give myself away.
You might find out
who I really am.
And what do you
suppose that would be?
Do you suppose that another
person who looks deeply
into your eyes will read all the
things you're ashamed of, all
your faults, all the
things you're guilty about?
Or is there some deeper
secret than that?
The eyes are our
most sensitive organ.
And when you look and look
and look into another person's
eyes, you're first
of all, looking
at the most beautiful
jewels in universe.
And if you look
down beyond that,
you see of course-- it's
the most beautiful jewel
in the universe because that's
the universe looking at you.
We are the eyes of the cosmos.
So that in a way, when you look
deeply into somebody's eyes,
you're looking
deep into yourself.
And the other person
is looking deeply
into the same self, which
many-eyed, as this mask is
many-faced, is looking
out everywhere.
One energy playing myriads
of different parts.
Why?
It's perfectly obvious.
Because if you were God, and
you knew everything, and were
in control of everything,
you would be bored to death.
As I said, it would be like
making love to a plastic woman.
Everything would be completely
predictable, completely known,
completely clear, no mystery,
no surprise whatever.
Look at it in still another way.
The object of our technology is
to control the world, to have,
as it were, a super electronic
push-button universe where
we can get anything we want,
fulfill any desire simply
by pushing a button.
You know, you're
Aladdin with the lamp.
You rub it, the djinn comes
and says, "Assalamu alaikum.
I am your humble servant.
What do you wish?
Anything you want."
And after a while
at that, just as you
would in those
dreams I described,
decide one day to forget
that you were dreaming,
you would say to the
genie of the lamp,
I would like a surprise.
Or God in the court of heaven
might turn to his vizier
and say, "Oh, Commander of
the Faithful, we are bored."
And the vizier of the court
would reply, "Oh, King,
live forever.
But surely, out of the
infinitude of your wisdom,
you can discover some
way of not being bored."
And the King would reply, "Oh,
vizier, give us a surprise."
You know, that's the whole basis
of the story of The Arabian
Nights.
Here was a very powerful
sultan who was bored.
And therefore, he
challenged by Scheherazade
to tell him a new
story every night,
so that the telling of tales,
getting involved in adventures,
would never, never end.
And it isn't that the reason
why we go to the theatre,
why we go to the movies?
Because we want to
get out of ourselves.
We want a surprise.
And a surprise means that
you have to other yourself.
That is to say, there has to
enter into your experience
some element that is
not under your control.
So if our technology were
to succeed completely,
and everything were to
be under our control,
we should eventually say
we need a new button.
In all these control
buttons, we always
have to have a button
labeled surprise.
And just so that it doesn't
become too dangerous,
we'll put a time limit on it.
Surprise for 15 minutes,
for an hour, for a day,
for a month, a year, a lifetime.
And then in the end, when the
surprise circuit is finished,
we'll be back in control, and
we'll all know what we are.
And we'll heave
a sigh of relief.
But after a while, we'll press
the button labeled surprise
once more.
So then, there's a
curious rhythm to this
if you'll notice what
I've been explaining.
And this rhythm corresponds
to the Hindu idea
of the course of time and
the way evolution works.
And their idea is
backwards from ours.
First of all, Hindus
think of time as circular,
as going round.
Look at your watch.
After all, it goes round.
But Westerners tend
to think of time
in a straight line,
one-way street.
And we got that idea
from the Hebrew religion
and from, in particular,
Saint Augustin.
The idea that there is
a time of creation, then
a course of history,
which leads up
to a final eschatological
catastrophe,
the end of the world.
And after that, the
judgment in which
all things will be put to
right, all questions answered,
and justice dealt
out to everyone
according to his merit.
And that'll be that.
Thereafter, the universe
will be, in a way, static.
There will be the eternally
saved and eternally damned.
Now, many of us may
not believe that today,
but that has been a dominating
belief throughout the course
of Western history,
and it has had
a tremendously powerful
influence on our culture.
But the Hindus
think of the world
as going round, and
round, and round
for always and
always in a rhythm.
And they calculate the rounds
in periods that in Sanskrit are
called kalpas, K-A-L-P-A. And
each kalpa lasts for 4,320,000
years.
And so a kalpa is the
period or manvantara
during which the world as
we know it is manifested.
And it is followed
by a period, also
a kalpa long-- 4,320,000
years-- which is called pralaya.
And this means when the world
is not manifested anymore.
And these are the days and
nights of Brahma, the Godhead.
During the manvantara, when
the world is manifested,
Brahma is asleep,
dreaming that he is all us
and everything that's going on.
And during the pralaya,
which is his day,
he's awake and knows
himself-- or itself,
because it's beyond
sex or anything
like that-- for who and
what he, she, it is.
And then, once again,
press button surprise.
And as in the course
of our dreaming,
we would very naturally dream
the most pleasant and rapturous
dreams first, and then get
more adventurous and experience
and explore the hot
dimensions of experience.
So in the same way,
the Hindus think
of a kalpa of the
manifested universe,
of the manvantara, as
divided into four periods.
And these four periods
are of different length.
The first is the longest.
And the last, the shortest.
And they are named in
accordance with the throws
in the Hindu game of dice.
There are four throws, the throw
of four, the throw of three,
the throw of two,
the throw of one.
The throw of four is always
the best throw, like the six
in our game.
And the throw of
one, the worst throw.
Now therefore, the first
throw is called Krta.
And the epoch, the
long, long period
for which this throw
lasts is called a yuga.
So we'll translate
yuga, an epoch.
And we'll translate
kalpa, an eon.
Now, the word Krta means done,
as when we say, well done.
And that is a period of
the world's existence
that we call the golden age,
when everything is perfect,
done to perfection.
When it comes to an
end, we get Treta yuga.
That means the throw of three.
And in this period
of manifestation,
something is a little off.
In other words, there's an
element of the uncertain,
an element of insecurity, an
element of adventure in things.
It's like, you know,
a three-legged stool
is not as secure as
a four-legged one.
You're a little bit more liable
to be thrown off balance.
That lasts for a
very long time, too.
But then we get next what
is called Dvapara yuga.
Dva, that means two.
And in this period,
the good and the bad,
the pleasurable and the
painful are equally balanced.
But then finally in the
end, there comes Kali yuga.
And this means, Kali, the
worst throw, the throw of one.
And this lasts for
the shortest time.
And this is the period
of manifestation
in which the unpleasurable,
painful, diabolical principle
finally takes over.
But notice that it has
the shortest innings.
In other words, if
you add up the periods
of years which they assign
to all the different yugas,
you will see that the
bad principle only
has the stage for about
one third of the time.
And at the end of the
Kali yuga, the myth
goes on to say that the great
destroyer of the worlds, God
manifested as the destructive
principle, Shiva, does
a dance called the Tandava.
And he appears blue-bodied with
10 arms with lightning and fire
appearing from every
pore in his skin,
and does a dance in which the
universe is finally destroyed.
There is that moment of cosmic
death, which is nevertheless
the waking up of
Brahma the creator.
For as Shiva turns
round and walks off
the stage, seen from behind,
he is Brahma, the creator,
the beginning of it all again.
And Vishnu, whose mask I've been
showing you, is the preserver.
That is to say, the going on
of it all, the whole state
of the Godhead being
manifested as many, many faces.
So do you see that this is a
philosophy of the role of evil
in life, which is in a
way rational and merciful?
You see, if we thought God
is playing with the world,
he has created it
for his pleasure,
and he has created all these
other beings than himself,
and they go through the most
horrible torments-- you know,
terminal cancer, children
being burned with napalm,
concentration camps,
the Inquisition,
the horrors that human beings go
through-- how is that possibly
justifiable under
any system where
we say, well, some
God created it?
And if a god didn't create it,
and there's nobody in charge,
and there's no rationality
to the whole thing,
but it's just a tale told by
an idiot full of sound and fury
signifying nothing, then you're
liable to say the only out
is suicide.
It's a ridiculous system.
But suppose it isn't that.
Suppose it's the kind of
thing I've described to you.
Supposing that it isn't that
God has all these victims
and is pleasing
himself, showing off
his justice by either
rewarding them or punishing
them, supposing it's
quite different from that,
supposing that God is the
one playing all the parts,
that God is the child being
burned to death with napalm,
there is no victim
except the victor.
All the different roles
which are being experienced,
all the different feelings
which are being felt,
are being felt by the one who
originally desires, decides,
wills to go into
that very situation.
Curiously enough, there's
something parallel
to this in Christianity.
Very few people know about it.
There's a passage in
Saint Paul's Epistle
to the Philippians in which
he says a very curious thing.
He says, "let this
mind be in you,
which was also in Christ Jesus
who, being in the form of God,
did not think identity
with God a thing
to be clung to, but humbled
himself and made himself
of no reputation and was
found in fashion as a man
and became obedient
to death even
to the death of the cross."
You see here, you have
exactly the same process,
the idea of God becoming
human, suffering all
that human beings can
suffer, even death.
And Saint Paul is saying,
"let this mind be in you."
That is to say let the
same kind of consciousness
be in you that was
in Jesus Christ.
OK.
Jesus Christ knew he was God.
Wake up and find out
eventually who you really are.
In our culture, of course,
they'll say you're crazy,
or you're blasphemous.
And they'll either
put you in jail
or in the nut house,
which is the same thing.
But if you wake up in India,
and you tell your friends
and relations, my goodness, I've
just discovered that I'm God,
they'll laugh and say,
oh, congratulations.
At last, you've found out.
>>This program is from a series
produced by The Electronic
University entitled
"The Essential
Lectures of Alan Watts."
For further information
about Alan's recordings,
write to The Electronic
University, Box 361 Mill
Valley, 94941.